article 21

INDIA’S CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT ACT VIOLATES
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
By Talia Lewis*
ABSTRACT
The Citizenship Amendment Act, recently passed legislation, comes
on the heels of a very tumultuous number of years, months, and weeks in
India. Most notably, Muslim communities and citizens fear the upheaval of
their way of life due to the decisions of the Hindu-majority who controls the
political actions of the democratic republic. These Muslim groups are not the
only worried parties. International humanitarian bodies have spoken out
against various recent actions of India’s government. The Citizenship
Amendment Act, if considered in the context of other actions by the governing
party in India, should be understood as violative of International human
rights laws and norms. India is subject to the standards set in United Nations
(UN) documents because it is party to covenants and declarations. This paper
discusses the formation of the UN bodies, which later promulgated such
treaties and declarations. It discusses the evolution of UN human rights law,
how it has applied in the past, and how it could be applied to the current
situation in India and its enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Act.
Moreover, this paper will review the India’s current events and how recent
history gave rise to the issues of religious intolerance that exist there, at
present. In short, this paper concludes that there is a persuasive argument
that India’s Citizenship Amendment Act violates international human rights
laws and norms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Presently, India is in turmoil. Protesters inhabit the streets,
lawmakers are overturning decades-long policies with the support of
the nation’s highest court, and citizens have begun to question
whether they will be rendered stateless by the nation they consider
home.1 The central controversy provoking the unrest is India’s
Citizenship Amendment Act. Opposition to the Act claims it
discriminates against the country’s Muslim minority population.2
Supporters, on the other hand, claim that the Act offers specific
religious groups who face discrimination and violence in neighboring
countries, a necessarily quicker route to Indian citizenship.3Because India is subject to the jurisdiction of International
Human Rights governing bodies regarding the violations of treatises
and covenants it signed, the Citizenship Amendment Act must not
only comport to national legal standards, but also specific
international law. This note argues that the Citizenship Amendment
Act is a violation of International Human Rights. Part II reviews how
international human rights bodies and instruments regulate religion.
Part III reviews India’s recent history and the discriminatory
implications of the Citizenship Amendment Act. Part IV explains how
India’s Citizenship Amendment Act arguably violates three
international human rights instruments: The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights; The International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights; and The Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief.
II. BACKGROUND ON INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS & HOW
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMUNITIES, LEGISLATION, AND
INSTRUMENTS REGULATE RELIGION
International human rights cannot be fully understood
without first discussing the United Nations (UN), what led to its
creation, and how it has evolved over time. The UN was Franklin
Delano Roosevelt’s brainchild.4 He envisioned four freedoms that
would facilitate peacefully co-existing nations after World War II’s
devastation: “freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship,
freedom from want, and freedom from fear.”5 These freedoms lay the
groundwork for the UN, which was formally chartered in 1945, shortly
after Roosevelt announced his vision.6
Of course, Roosevelt was not solely responsible for the UN and
its Charter. In 1945, fifty delegates from many different nations came
together to determine how the UN would operate. They determined
that it would be an international governing body, and just as Roosevelt
envisioned, human rights and freedoms would be central to its focus.
The delegates aimed to create a better version of the failed League of Nations. They chartered the UN with new information: human rights
were a matter of international concern, and therefore should not be left
solely to regulation by the sovereign states.7 World War II was proof
positive of that. The Charter tasked the UN’s General Assembly with
promoting international cooperation to further human rights and
required the “creation of a commission for the promotion of human
rights.”8 These assignments paved the way for the UN to later build
on human rights in its founding Charter; among them, religion.
The UN establishes international human rights standards
through the drafting of declarations and conventions. Although the
instruments may be drafted through nuanced approaches, both
instruments are sourced from the human rights community in
general.9 In other words, good, old-fashioned collective action usually
spurs the relevant UN body to begin the drafting process. Usually,
after activists have collectively lobbied the UN branch at issue,
different contributors are sought out to create a draft of the covenant
or declaration.10 Contributors take many shapes and forms, including
individuals, organizations, and members of the UN.11 The main
attribute is that these contributors are authorities on information
salient for the creation of the instrument at hand. Once a final draft is
created, the document is presented to the UN General Assembly.12
There, differing, international governments weigh in to determine
whether to accept, or reject, the proposed instrument.13 Treaties, not
declarations, when ratified, are then offered for signature, ratification,
or accession.14 The process to finally accept and certify a human rights
declaration or covenant is one “of innovation and improvisation, bearing the imprints of the members of the international human rights
movement.”15
Differing instruments import different obligations on to the
international community. Some instruments impose new norms and
customs by which nations must abide their behavior. Other
instruments impose legal obligations on the nations that choose to
adopt them. Generally, it is thought that sweeping documents, such as
the UN Charter, serve to create international norms.16 Norms may be
binding. For example, Article 55 of the UN Charter states that members
of the body must promote “universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language, and religion.”17 Article 56 states that “all
members pledge to take joint and separate action in cooperation with
the Organization for the achievement of the purposes set forth in
Article 55.”18 Taken together, these provisos establish a legally binding
obligation for UN Member States. However, according to the
International Court of Justice, peremptory norms are the only ones
which are binding on their face. These norms are non-derogable
because they are fundamental. Not every peremptory norm is
explicitly stated, nor is it required that every state is in agreement
about the status of a certain right.19 It is necessary that “the norm is
accepted and recognized by the international community of States as
a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted and which
can be modified only by a subsequent norm of general international
law having the same character.”20 To determine if a norm is
peremptory, the collective will of the group can overrule the
individual will of a sovereign.21 Notably, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights on Undocumented Migrants has concluded that the
obligation of non-discrimination is a peremptory right.22Charters, which are treaties, are usually legally binding only if
sovereign states choose to sign and adopt them.23 Even when states
choose to do so, they may sign with contingencies that allow more
variance in their laws than the international instrument would
support.24 Charters that have not been adopted by sovereign states,
and norm-establishing instruments can create binding customary
international law by which every sovereign must comport their
behavior.25 However, there are specific factors that must be met for
charters to be considered as such, and it is not a commonly awarded
status.26
The UN, as a “non-state international organization” that
regulates religion and other fundamental human rights at the
international level, promulgated three main instruments during its
lifetime which establish and elaborate on the right to religious
freedom.27 Those instruments are: the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR); the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR); and the Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief.28 For each instrument, different protocols exist that govern who
is subject to jurisdiction by the body assigned to oversee alleged
violations of said document, and different standards exist to determine
if a violation occurred.
Considered a foundational element of human rights, the
UDHR serves as the seed that spawned what we understand as
international human rights law today. This instrument is legally
binding in some ways but is better understood as setting forth
international human rights customs and norms. Its progeny includes
the ICCPR, which elaborated on, with much more specificity, religious
rights of individuals and groups, and the obligations of sovereigns to
protect those rights. This instrument is legally binding. Finally, the However, recent events, have disrupted that, more or less, peaceful coexistence. The result is visible internationally via news-media outlets,
and the blame has been laid at the feet of both citizens and lawmakers,
depending on who is asked. The Citizenship Amendment Act seems
to be the biggest provocateur of the conflict between the Bharatiya
Janata Party (BJP), the right-wing Hindu nationalist-led government,
and protesters (both Muslim and otherwise).33
The legislation comes on the heels of numerous events,
including conspicuous anti-Muslim legal decisions, incidents, and
rhetoric. In early November, India’s Supreme Court, its highest court,
ruled unanimously that a Hindu temple would be built in the spot
where riots by Hindu extremists in 1992 destroyed a 16th century
mosque.34 The ruling casts renewed light on the violent ideology, once
unconventional, which can now be seen practiced by India’s highestranking politicians.35 India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, an
observer of Hinduism, has mastered the anti-Muslim rhetoric. His
dialogue takes aim at illegal immigrants and pro-terrorist groups, but
he couches the messages in anti-Muslim language, sometimes
explicitly and sometimes through allusions.36 His political platforms
has always been pro-Hindu, and his actions effectively anti-Muslim,
but since he elevated to India’s highest elected office, the impacts of
his policies are being felt throughout the whole of the democratic
republic.37
In August 2019, Modi took aim at Kashmir, India’s only
Muslim-majority state, withdrawing its autonomy and detaining many of its citizens.38 Revocation of Kashmir’s autonomy effectively
dismantles the intention of the provision: “to help preserve the state’s
religious and ethnic identity,” leaving its Muslim majority status on
tenuous ground.39 In order to safeguard Kashmir’s residents and
Muslim-majority status, the provision had prohibited (for the most
part) individuals from India’s Hindu majority from settling there.40
Modi is only one of the politicians propagating anti-Muslim
rhetoric and ideology. BJP president Amit Shah referred to Muslim
illegal migrants as “termites,” subsequently vowing to dispose of them
by throwing them into the sea.41 Another BJP member, Yogi
Adityanath, was temporarily banned from the campaign trail in April
by India’s election commission for his rhetoric.42 In one speech, he
described Muslim voters who supported the opposing party as a
“green virus.”43 Even against the backdrop of these messages, Modi’s
spokespeople have outrightly denied targeting the minority Muslim
population in India.44 Furthermore, many news outlets have
supported Modi’s narrative of certain events, working to construe
incidents as positive changes to what he and his party are calling the
“New India.”45
Featured prominently on the menu of anti-Muslim actions
taken by the BJP is the Citizenship Amendment Act. The predecessor
to the Act was proposed in 2016 but failed to pass the upper house of
Parliament in India, which is composed of only a minority of BJP
members.46 This bill, slightly different from the one originally brought before Parliament, was passed by both houses of Parliament on
December 11, 2019.47
The Citizenship Amendment Act is an amendment to the preexisting Indian Citizenship law that prohibits illegal immigrants from
becoming citizens.48 The law has been in place since 1955.49 It was
enacted in the years immediately following the partition of Pakistan
and India, and citizenship conflicts between India and Bangladesh.50
The 1955 Indian Citizenship Act’s focus is on the prohibition on illegal
immigrants becoming citizens.51The 2019 amendment to this Act
utilizes religious and ethnic classifications to distinguish between
groups whose privileges will be altered.52 Specifically, the bill offers
amnesty to people belonging to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi,
or Christian community from Bangladesh, Afghanistan, or Pakistan.53
This means, individuals belonging to this group–that can prove they
belong to this group–will not be deemed illegal immigrants in India.54
This changes their rights drastically because illegal immigrants
can be detained or deported.55 Moreover, the Act changes the
residency requirements for individuals applying for Indian
citizenship. Individuals belonging to the above groups are no longer
subject to the requirement that they must live and work legally in India
for the eleven years prior to application.56 Now, they can apply for
citizenship if they have lived and worked legally in India for six
years.57 For practical purposes, these two changes go together. If a
person is not an illegal immigrant because they fit into one of the
specific enumerated ethnic and religious classifications, then they have
not been illegally residing in India, and therefore are more likely to
meet the residency requirement set forth in the amendment.According to India’s Prime Minister, and the Parliament, the
reason for classifying groups according to religion and ethnicity are
legitimate. Proponents of the legislation claim that these classifications
go together because the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi, and
Christian populations in Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and Pakistan are all
minority groups.58 Accordingly, these groups need protection in India
because they are more likely to land there in an effort to avoid
persecution in their home countries.59 This explanation goes to the
conspicuous absence of the Muslim community from the enumerated
backgrounds afforded special rights under the new Amendment.
Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan are all Muslim-majority
countries, and thus Muslim immigrants who hail from those lands are
less likely to have left fleeing persecution or in pursuit of asylum in
India. However, this excuse does not extend to Myanmar’s Rohingya
Muslims who, fleeing exploitation and massacre, have sought
citizenship in neighboring countries like India for years.60 Still,
proponents claim that Rohingya Muslims are violent, and would put
Indian citizens in danger if they were offered an expedited route to
citizenship.
Those who oppose the Amendment claim that these
explanations do not hold water. They argue that considered in light of
recent political events in India, and the actual impact the amendment
will have, the true intent of the legislators is clear: to offer citizenship
rights to only some individuals, leading to the further oppression of
India’s Muslim population and further prohibition on Muslim
migration to India. One Indian human rights activist described the Act
as a “most dangerous piece of legislation” because “it amounts to truly
destroying the character of the Indian state and the Constitution.”61
This argument is not remarkable. Individuals in India and
internationally fear that the Citizenship Amendment Act will only
serve to further marginalize Muslims in the country. Chief among the arguments against the Citizenship Amendment is that it violates
international human rights laws; “while inclusionary in its stated
objective, [the Act] is exclusionary in its structure and intent.”62
The alleged violation is made more urgent due to India’s
ongoing census project: the National Register of Citizens (NRC). The
NRC was created in 1951 and, for the most part, was left untouched
until 2015 when the government began updating the list.63 The BJP-led
government focused the update on Assam, a northern Indian state that
borders Bangladesh.64 Individuals were required to show they were
not illegal immigrants by going through an arduous process aimed at
proving to government officials that they, and their ancestors,
migrated to India before March 24, 1971.65 The process, which was
ongoing until the final list came out in July 2019, has been exhausting
to many. Families fear they will be broken up; individuals who may
have fled persecution in their home countries have none of the
required documentation and wonder if their expulsion from India will
be the consequence. These fears are compounded because no one
knows what will happen once they have been declared non-citizens.66
Suicides have climbed since the initiation of the process.67 When the
list was finally published, many were overjoyed, but the majority were
not. Families were split down the middle with some being declared
Indian citizens, and others not: brothers, sisters, parents, aunts, uncles,
and cousins were given a different status.68 Ultimately, 1.9 million
people were left off the registry.69 The majority of those left without
Indian citizenship were Bengali people, but there did not seem to be adisparity between the Hindu Bengali and Muslim Bengali populations
left without statehood, or at least without Indian citizenship.70 India’s
governing party left a route for appeal, but it looks like a disorganized
process. The number of days allotted for appellate procedures seems
unrealistic in the face of the number of individuals who are likely to
appeal, and in the face of the multi-pronged procedure the appeal will
necessitate if implemented as described.71 As it stands, many have
already been detained in detention centers.72
The NRC and its effects paved the way for the Citizenship
Amendment Act, and the danger that it poses to Muslims as opposed
to other groups. On the one hand, the Amendment Act would allow
those individuals of specified descent and affiliation that were
declared non-citizens an expedited, clear method of re-achieving
citizenship. In fact, Amit Shah, a minister, and BJP member told the
Times of India, that every “refugee – Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, Jain,
Christian and Parsi – would be granted citizenship under a new bill,”
just before the Amendment was introduced and ultimately passed by
Parliament.73 Muslims, on the other hand, will be left securely without
a route to citizenship. Under the prior Citizenship Act–which is still
legally binding–illegal immigrants are prohibited from applying for
Indian citizenship. Moreover, the government has permission to
detain and deport any illegal immigrants they find. So, with the danger
of being declared stateless by way of the NRC, and then foreclosed
from any method of applying for citizenship, all the while being
exposed to the probability of arrest and deportation, Muslims in India,
and human rights activists have cause to be concerned. The unrest
instigated by these circumstances is no surprise.
IV. INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR
APPLICATION TO INDIA’S CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT ACT
The right to religious freedom underscored the very creation
of the UN. The UN body was preceded by, and influenced by,
Roosevelt’s ideals: creating a united, international league of sovereign
states that would work together with the aim to achieve and maintain
peace on a global scale, all the while reinforcing freedoms. Religious
freedom was among the four freedoms Roosevelt envisioned. Thus, it
is unsurprising that religious freedom was, in fact, baked into the UN’s
founding Charter. The founding Charter makes a clear allusion to
equal freedoms for all or said succinctly: promoting antidiscriminatory policies by protecting and developing friendly
relations and respect between nations.74
The Charter places development of said respect on the
“principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples.”75 It also
sets the aims of the United Nations: “achieve[ing] international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character,” and “promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all without distinction.”76 Article 55 of the UN Charter refers
directly to religious freedom.77 It states: “With a view to creation of
conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful
and friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, the United Nations
shall promote . . . universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction to race,
sex, language, or religion.”78 With such a foundation, it is unsurprising
that the UN has continued to create and enforce international
instruments and bodies aimed at promoting equal freedoms, antidiscrimination, and fundamental human rights, like religion.
In order to properly construe the instruments in the following
analysis, it is important to consider the textual reading of what is
included in each. There are different ways to understand how to apply
the instructive provisos in each instrument. One method of
interpretation is the textualist reading. Because this method construes
language to mean literally what the text dictates, it is important to
know both the definitional and normative understandings of the
pertinent terms. These understandings can be ascertained from the
UN, its bodies, and in the legal community in general. These terms
include, but are not limited to: religion, belief, and discrimination.
Religion and belief, terms found in UN instruments, are
defined differently. In some legal dictionaries, there are very specific
definitions. For example, Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary, elucidates: “The
essential elements of religion are belief in and the worship of God.”79
Alternatively, in Black’s Law Dictionary, religion is defined as “a
[human’s] relation to Divinity, to reverence worship, obedience, and
submission to mandates and precepts of supernatural or superior
beings. In its broadest sense [religion includes all forms of belief in the
existence of superior beings exercising power over human beings by
volition, imposing rules of conduct, with future rewards and
punishments.”80 The general theme of these, and other, definitions of
religion found in legal dictionaries is that religion is composed of
several elements: (1) recognition in some form of supreme being; (2)
this being exercises power in some way; (3) believers are expected to
follow some sort of moral or philosophical code that comports with the
teachings and beliefs promulgated by the supreme being; (4) believers
are generally expected to express their belief, usually in some form of
worship or prayer; and (5) sometimes there is an established place of
worship, like a church, or some other institution or organization.81
The UN and its subsidiary bodies generally conceive of
“religion” as the idea of “a cultural universal that exist[s] instruments governing it to transfer over into many different types of
situations. In fact, modern human rights law views religion as
applying to beliefs that are theistic, atheistic, and anywhere inbetween.83 Accordingly, the UN adopted a list of rights it views as
belonging in the sphere of religion that its instruments protect.84 The
heading, “freedom of thought, conscience, and religion,” precedes its
catalog of rights.85
This absence of a specific definition of religion should not
affect the issue here because India’s Citizenship Amendment Act lists
a number of specific religions within the Amendment. There is no
argument that the groups, which will receive or be denied certain
rights as a result of the Amendment, will be accorded said rights based
on their religious affiliation.
Belief, as compared to the definitions of religion, is generally
defined more broadly. Usually, its definition includes religious beliefs,
but it also includes other beliefs. The legal definition is “a conviction
of the truth of a proposition, existing subjectively in the mind, and
induced by argument, persuasion or proof addressed to the
judgment.”86 Particular UN instruments have construed belief to
“cover the rights of nonreligious persons such as atheists, agnostics,
rationalists, and others.”87 For example, Special Rapporteur Arcot
Krishnaswami reportedly attempted to minimized controversy by
including both theistic and non-theistic creeds in his report: he utilized
the phrase “religion or belief”.88 Although there is not one specific
definition of religion in UN documents, the UN has made clear that it
includes the concept of belief.89 Thus, for the most part, states are left to define religion on their own, which has led to a diverse number of
definitions.90
The term discrimination can be understood in various ways.
Discrimination is a distinction based on prejudice, and it results in the
unfair treatment of individuals or groups.91 As it pertains to social
groups, prejudice refers to an existing bias against members of one
group, or another.92 Quite often, prejudice is simply based on social
stereotypes. At its worst, prejudice between social groups involves
“denying groups benefits and rights unjustly or, conversely, unfairly
showing unwarranted favor towards others.”93 Most unlawful
discrimination can be categorized in one of two ways: direct, or
indirect discrimination.94 To discriminate directly “involves treating
someone less favorably, because of the possession of a prohibited
attribute such as religion than they would treat someone without the
prohibited attribute who was in the same circumstances.”95 On the
other hand, indirect discrimination “involves setting a condition or
requirement that a smaller proportion of those with the prohibited
attribute can comply with than those who do not have the prohibited
attribute, without reasonable justification.”96
One category of discriminatory acts by the government applies
well to the situation in India with the Citizenship Amendment Act.
This category occurs if a government enacts legislation which
ultimately favors majority religions, and disadvantages minority
religion(s).97 These situations are often the result of dominance by one
majority religious group which overlaps with biases against one
minority religious group.98 This is a type of discrimination because
“such a situation cannot be characterized as true freedom to choose
one’s faith and worship freely.”99 Moreover, this type of
discrimination is extremely dangerous because linking the majority
religion to a national identity and scapegoating a minority group leads
to racial and religious animus and can often lead to other abuses of
human rights and discriminatory acts, on the part of the government
or others.
Over the years, the UN, an outgrowth, or rather, the progeny
of the League of Nations, has continued to grow and evolve. Situated
on a legacy and intention of promoting peace and creating links
between democratic societies internationally, this body relied mainly
on three instruments to regulate and set the standards for religionbased human rights, among other things. As the instruments have
been created and enacted, other regulatory bodies have sprung up to
preside over possible violations of said instruments. Over time, these
bodies created precedents by which alleged violations may be
measured. Thus, in order to do an analysis of the possible violations of
international human rights via the enactment of the Citizenship
Amendment Act in India, it is pertinent to review what each
instrument contributes to the body of law and norms regulating
religious equality and anti-discrimination and the bodies that oversee
the alleged violations of these norms and laws.
A. THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (UDHR)
The UDHR was the first, and is widely conceived as the most
important, document promulgated for, and by, the UN. It was signed
in 1948, only three years after the UN was officially chartered.100 The
instrument was created by the Human Rights Commission, who
furnished the document on the premise that “there [are] fundamental
rights of man that supersede[] the rights of governments and those
rights need[] to be enshrined for all the world to see in a legal
document.”101 It serves as part of an “international bill of rights.”102 It
is not technically law because it is not enforceable like a treaty or
covenant, but neither is it quite as limited as a traditional declaration;
it is more sweeping than a traditional declaration.103 Instead, it is
recognized as a “standard of achievement for all peoples of all human rights instruments. Accordingly, the UDHR “has been the
foundation of much of the post-1945 codification of human rights, and
the international legal system is replete with global and regional
treaties. based, in large measure, on the Declaration.”105
Notably, in practice the UN and its organs are “guided in their
conduct by [the UDHR’s] provisions.106 So, while not technically
legally binding, it has influenced many decisions made by the UN in
determining if its human rights standards and laws were violated.
Article18 of the UDHR applies to freedom of religion. It reads
in full: “Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief,
and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public
or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice,
worship and observance.”107 There are two parts to this proviso. The
first “guarantees the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion.”108 This part of the article is a very broadly constructed
freedom.109 It grants people permission and the privilege to believe in
something, or not to. It includes the freedom of conscience, not just
with belief.110 Thus, “the article deals not only with religious but also
with the philosophical, cultural, scientific, and political aspects of
freedom of thought.”111 The second part of the proviso is a nonexhaustive list of the freedoms guaranteed in the first part.112 The list
“contains only those detailed rights which the United Nations thought
essential to include because their observance might not be universal at Although the foremost proviso in the UDHR pertaining to
religious freedoms is Article 18, there are other salient clauses in the
document too. Article 2 declares that “[e]veryone is entitled to all the
rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction
of . . . religion.”114 Thus, the UDHR prohibits distinctions of religion as
reason for foreclosing the ability of a person to utilize a right set forth
within the same document.115 Also, Article 29 addresses “limitations
in the exercise of proclaimed rights,” which is relevant “to those
interested in protecting religious rights.”116
The Citizenship Amendment Act could be construed as a
violation of the UDHR. The UDHR is applicable to India and its
government because India is a member-state to the UN.117 The Act
arguably interferes with the freedom to choose and practice the
religion of one’s choice. Because there is detriment to those individuals
who are not of a specific religion–those religions enumerated in the
Act–there is a lack of freedom of choice. Muslim citizens are left with
the option to practice their religion or possibly face expulsion from the
country they consider their home. If the act passes and the NRC
declares a large populous of Muslims non-citizens, those citizens will
be effectively without a route to citizenship. This choice is truly a lack
thereof and could be understood as a violation of Article 18 of the
UDHR, and thus a violation of international human rights law.
Although there is question as to how influential the UDHR can be in a
determination of whether or not there was a violation of human rights
because the instrument is not technically legally binding, in practice
the violation of the principles of the UDHR have served as a very
powerful influence over the committees determining if violations
occurred.
The UDHR provided the legal framework from which many
other treatises and legal standards were generated. Specifically, the
words in Article 18, deemed “one of the most influential statements of
religious rights of mankind yet devised,” while not technically
enforceable, are foundational for every human rights instrument which proceeded them.118 Generally, the UDHR”is one of the most
important [] legal documents of our time, and most of its contents can
now be seen as customary international law.”119 One such document
that utilized the legal framework provided by the UDHR in the context
of religious freedom is the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR).
B. THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL
RIGHTS (ICCPR)
Years following the drafting of the UDHR, the UN
Subcommission on the Prevention of Discrimination appointed Special
Rapporteur Ancot Krishnaswami to create a report regarding religious
rights and make recommendations about how the UN could help end
religious discrimination.120 In 1959, three years following his
appointment, Krishnaswami submitted a report based on information
from 82 country studies he analyzed.121 The report “includes a list of
16 principles for legislation on the topic of religion and belief,
especially on the topic of acceptable manifestations.”122 Also in the
report were conclusions Krishnaswami reached regarding actions and
legislation he thought might lead to possible violations or
infringements on the right to religious freedoms. Krishnaswami’s
report included: (1) that possible coercion to join organizations or
communities by certain religious groups could become an
“infringement of the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and
religion;” and (2) “the freedom to maintain (or change) a religion or
belief is less prone to restriction, the right to manifest it is often the
subject of state regulation and limitations.”123 Krishnaswami’s report
was foundational to the creation of the ICCPR and the 1981 Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination
Based on Religion or Belief.124 Ultimately, the rights expounded in the UDHR were codified
in two international covenants. Both were adopted in 1966 and became
effective, legally, in 1976.125 One of which, the ICCPR included
provisos dedicated to religious rights and freedoms. The ICCPR is
considered “the most comprehensive and well-established UN treaty
on civil and political rights.”126 These rights are “immediately
binding” on parties to the covenant according to article 2(1).127 The
ICCPR is justiciable on an international level.128
The Human Rights Committee (HRC) is an arm of the UN that
enforces the ICCPR. Specifically, it is “the body of independent experts
that monitors implementation of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights by its State parties.”129 The Committee was
established by Article 28 of the ICCPR and consists of a panel of 18
human rights experts.130 They accede to the panel after a nomination
by the state of which they are a national, and then an election where a
majority of all state parties vote them in.131 Each member serves for
four years, and elections are held every two years.132
The procedures in place that allow the HRC to enforce the
ICCPR and allow the Committee to hold states accountable are both
compulsory and optional.133 Article 40 requires state parties to submit
periodic reports regarding their implementation of the covenant.134
Article 41 “provides for the Committee to consider inter-state
complaints.”135 Ultimately, after reviewing the reports or complaints it receives, the Committee will furnish a type of report card including a
list of things that must be addressed within the state, and likely there
will be certain highlights, which represent what the Committee
considers to be priority issues.136 The Committee may require that the
state provide certain follow-up information within a certain time
period.137 The Special Rapporteur, whose role was established in 2002,
will generally review those follow-up reports and report back to the
full Committee with his conclusions.138 It is noteworthy that the
Committee has faced Member States’ noncompliance with requested
reports, or follow-ups. In the face of noncompliance the HRC may
“examine state reports in the absence of a State Party delegation if no
delegation should present on the scheduled date, and will even be
prepared to examine a State’s ICCPR implementation record in the
absence of a report after notifying the relevant State of the date of such
examination.”139
There are specific religious rights and freedoms included in the
ICCPR. Article 18 of the instrument enumerates these rights and
freedoms. It reads in full:
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
choice, and freedom, either individually or in
community with others and in public or private, to
manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance,
practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would
impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or
belief of his choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs may be
subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by
law and are necessary to protect public safety, order,
health, or morals or the fundamental rights and
freedoms of others. 4. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to have respect for the liberty of parents and, when
applicable, legal guardians to ensure the religious and
moral education of their children in conformity with
their own convictions.140
Interpreting these provisions, the HRC made a number of
decisions based on the cases that came before them. By reviewing those
cases one can discern how each provision may be practically applied
to possible violations of human rights law.
One section of Article 18 declares that “no one shall be subject
to coercion that would impair his freedom to follow or to adopt a
religion or belief of his choice.”141 Although coercion is not specifically
defined, it has been interpreted to mean the use of force, threats, and
also more subtle “forms of illegitimate influence.”142 Accordingly,
“one should suffer no detriment due to one’s adherence to a certain
religion.”143 This section has been applied in numerous ways. For
example, in Germany, the Committee determined that there was a
violation of the ICCPR when “membership of certain” religions
“disqualified a person from holding certain public service
positions.”144 In short, this section of the ICCPR, “requires States to
prevent private coercion of another to have or adopt a religion, belief,
conscience, or opinion.”145
The clause regulating the establishment of religion is relevant
here too. In General Comment 22, the ICCPR states, the fact that one
religion’s “followers comprise the majority of the population, shall not
result in any impairment of the enjoyment of any of the rights under
the Covenant, including article 18 or 27, nor in any discrimination
against adherents to other religions or non-believers.”146 The HRC
usually interprets this proviso to violate rights when there is a state 
religion, but it applies to majority religious groups in states too. For
example, the HRC found a violation of international human rights
when in Argentina, the Catholic Church was the recipient of
“preferential treatment, including financial subsidies,” as opposed to
other religious denominations.147 This is considered a type of religious
discrimination.148
The ICCPR provides binding international law that reveals
India is violating international human rights by passing its Citizenship
Amendment Act. It is certainly arguable that the BJP-led government
in India is using coercive tactics to impair its citizens from following
their religion of choice by way of the Citizenship Amendment Act.
Because the Act unquestioningly subverts the rights of one religious
group, the Muslims, in favor of a handful of others, the Act causes
detriment to those who practice the Muslim faith. This, in itself, is
enough according to the text of the ICCPR to find a violation.
However, the argument is made stronger by drawing a parallel to the
violation found by the HRC in Germany. There, individuals who
practiced a certain faith were excluded from holding certain jobs. Here,
and much more critically, individuals will be prohibited from
pursuing a route to citizenship due to the Act in question. If the
prohibition extended to groups of all faiths, it would not be violative,
but the fact that it is exclusionary is explicitly the problem.
Furthermore, there is a good argument that the Citizenship
Amendment Act violates the regulation in the ICCPR of the
establishment of religion. Because the Act is oriented towards
protecting the minority-religious groups rights, this proviso applies.
The HRC found discrimination when the Catholic Church received
preferential treatment by the Argentinian government. Here, there is
likely the same, if not worse, discrimination because the Indian
Government has extended preferential treatment to people of the
Hindu faith through the Citizenship Amendment Act, thereby
prohibiting people of other religions from exercising the same rights
due only to their religious orientation. Moreover, since Muslims
comprise a minority religious group in India, who by way of the 
Citizenship Amendment Act face discrimination, this is a violation of
the ICCPR proviso regulating the establishment of state religions.
C. THE DECLARATION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF
INTOLERANCE AND OF DISCRIMINATION BASED ON RELIGION OR
BELIEF
The Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief is considered the
most important instrument expounding international rights and
standards regarding the protection of religious beliefs and the
prohibition of discrimination based on religious beliefs.149 It is “by far
the most developed and far-reaching concept of religion developed by
any UN entity.”150 The declaration was necessitated by an “outburst of
antisemitic incidents that occurred in several places in 1959 and
1960.”151 People, in general, and the UN, specifically, feared the
resurrection of Naziism–the same fear that provoked the creation of
the UN.152
The creation of the Declaration was a long and onerous one. In
response to the UN General Assembly’s request for a declaration and
treatise protecting religious freedoms, the UN Commission on Human
Rights was commissioned to create the draft.153 It took them upwards
of nine years following the request to produce a draft, and even then,
it was only a draft of the Declaration and not a treatise.154 The draft
convention is currently pending completion in the Committee.155 The
lengthy adoption process for the draft reflected the different notions
and conceptions about religion and discrimination held by the
different constituent states who contributed to its creation. The process
concluded with a show of solidarity when there were no opposing 
votes to adopting the draft Declaration by the UN Commission on
Human Rights before sending it over to the General Assembly.156
Ultimately, the Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly in
1981.157
The Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief has many salient
provisos. The first article, in a parallel structure to that of the UDHR,
states:
Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have a
religion or whatever belief of his choice, and freedom, either
individually or in community with others, and in public or private, to
manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and
teaching.158
It includes a prohibition on coercion, which would inhibit
individuals from practicing their religion freely, in a way that parallels
the prohibition in the ICCPR.159 Notably, the word “everyone” in the
article extends its utility and application to even those who are not
technically residents of a place.160
Article 2 prohibits religious discrimination clearly: “No one
shall be subject to discrimination” by anyone “on the grounds of
religion.”161 This proviso is important because it imposes a prohibition
on discrimination to any state or government or any actor at all: private
or public, individual or group actors.162 Moreover, the second part of
Article 2 provides a definition for what intolerance and discrimination
based on religion or belief means: “any distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference based on religion or belief and having as its
purpose or as its effect nullification or impairment of the recognition,
enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms on
an equal basis.”163 Then, Article 3 underscores the importance of
religious freedom,164 representing a recognition that religious rights
and freedoms are fundamental human rights.
Article 4 of the Declaration focuses on reminding States that
they have an obligation to their citizens not to infringe on their
religious freedoms, and also to protect them from other actors who
may impose restrictions.165 In fact, the second portion of Article 4
demands that States “shall make all efforts to enact or rescind
legislation as necessary to prohibit discrimination, as well as taking
other appropriate measures to combat intolerance on the grounds of
religion or other beliefs.”166 Thus, the legislature of every memberstate to the UN has an obligation to comport their legislation to the
requirements of religious freedom as set forth so specifically in this
Declaration.
Finally, the last three articles include important provisions as
to how to understand the Declaration. Article 6 enumerates freedoms
accorded to every individual regarding their ability to practice
religion.167 Article 7 states that the “rights and freedoms set forth in the
present Declaration shall be accorded in national legislation in such a
manner that everyone shall be able to avail himself of such rights and
freedoms in practice.”168 And, Article 8 clarifies that all the provisions
in the Declaration should be construed to fall in line with “any right
defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenants on Human Rights.”169
The rights set forth in this Declaration provide clear guidelines
to understanding how the Indian government is violating
international human rights by enacting the Citizenship Amendment
Act. The Declaration is applicable to India because it is a member-state
to the UN.170 Article 1 of the Declaration exposes a violation in a similar 
way to those violations of the ICCPR and the UDHR: the Citizenship
Act imposes, at the very least, implicit coercion on Muslims in India
not to continue practicing their religion because they fear deportation.
This proviso may be even more salient here, in this Declaration,
because its use of the word “everyone,” which extends the application
of the Declaration to those Indian residents who may be declared noncitizens as a result of the determinations made in pursuit to publish an
updated NRC. Moreover, Article 2 prohibits the same type of
violation. It disclaims any discrimination which might stand in the
way of an individual exercising their right to religious freedoms. In the
same way the Amendment Act violates the first article of the
Declaration, it also violates the second article.
Interestingly, Article 4 seems to prohibit the exact type of
discrimination which will occur as a result of the enactment of the
Citizenship Amendment Act. It proscribes legislation that will impose
discriminatory effects on citizens of states and imports a burden on
state legislatures to create laws that, in fact, will protect its citizens
from religious discrimination. The Citizenship Amendment Act is
discriminatory on its face because it affords certain rights and
permissions to groups of one religion and not to others. Clearly, this
type of legislation does not promote equality and therefore could be
construed as violative of the Declaration’s Article 4.
The whole of the Declaration promotes a theme of religious
freedoms and tolerance. The Declaration disallows the types of
behavior displayed in India in recent years, and the Citizenship
Amendment Act, when placed side by side with this instrument is a
clear violation of numerous of its provisos.
CONCLUSION
India’s recent enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Act
violates international human rights. The Indian government has
disputed the discriminatory nature of the Act. However, after a review
of international human rights instruments and prior UN findings of
discriminatory conduct internationally, that this act discriminates
against Muslims. The instruments that provide the standards and laws
that are violated by the Citizenship Amendment Act are the UDHR,
the ICCPR, and the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief. Each
instrument is nuanced, but all promote the same types of themes, and
prohibit the same types of conduct. Chief among the prohibited
conduct is discrimination on the basis of religion. By conspicuously
discriminating against Muslims, India’s government is violating
international human rights norms and laws
present.”11