CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT ACT:INDIA’S LOSING GRIP ON SECULARISM
With the Lok Sabha elections in India drawing closer, the Bharatiya Janata Party
(BJP)’s political communication - which is largly focused on anti-Muslim rhetoric
and practices – is getting sharper. The BJP government issued rules for the
discrimonatory Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on 11 March 2024. The Act aims
to grant Indian citizenship to immigrants who fled to India from Pakistan,
Afghanistan, and Bangladesh before 31 December 2014. This citizenship offer is
only limited to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians.1
The CAA is an amendment to the Citizenship Act of 1955 which was amended earlier as well in 1986,
1992, 2013, and 2015. The latest amendment was first presented by the BJP in 2016, but due to lack
of majority, the measure could not get parliament’s approval. In January 2019, a Parliamentary
committee report said that around 31,313 illegal immigrants entered India before 31 December
2014. In December 2019, the Act was passed by the Parliament (lower and upper house), which led
to severe protests across the country.2 The Act was opposed by not just Muslims but other groups as
well, especially in the North Eastern States of India where it is believed that the immigrant
population will dominate the native population causing socio-cultural impacts. Student committees
of Jamia Millia Islamia organized several protests which met severe responses from the government
More than 200 pleas were also filed against the Act. Because of the social unrest against the CAA
that resulted in more than 100 deaths, the BJP could not proceed further on the Act in 2019.
As the CAA is implemented, it requires the immigrants to present any of the nine different
documents to show their origin, and any of the 20 documents to prove their entry in India. The
second section of the Act says, “Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain,
Parsi or Christian community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into India on
or before the 31st day of December, 2014 and who has been exempted by the Central Government
by or under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 or
from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any rule or order made
thereunder, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act."3
The Act is criticized not just in India but across the world as it hurts India’s so-called secularism and is
against Article 14 of the Indian constitution which says that “the State shall not deny to any person
equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.”4 Kapil Sibal,
former Law Minister said in an interview that the Act is absolutely against the constitution as it
grants citizenship on the basis of religion. If the BJP government is truly sincere about the plight of
minorities in neighboring countries, then it is unclear on what basis only the three countries -
Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan - are selected? Responding to 237 petitions filed against the
CAA, the Indian Supreme Court has refused to stay implementation, but asked the government to
respond within three weeks. The thrust of Modi government’s action is not helping ‘immigrants’ but
allegedly presecuted minorities in their respective countries.5 This is a politically motivated move.
Officials in India including Home Minister Amit Shah said that Muslims are not included in the Act,
because they are well off in their countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan. Experts have
highlighted the contradictions by pointing out that if India is so concerned about the persecuted
minorities in the neighboring countries, why the government has been calling immigrants from
Rohingya ‘illegal’ and asking to detain them?6 Even when these Rohingya Muslims took the sea route
to escape from their country, more than 300 died in their way while the Indian Navy could have
saved them. So this official narrative of looking after the immigrants is patently a cover story that
the Modi government has come up with.
In Assam, local organizations are protesting against the Act because of increased migration from
Bangladesh.7 Protesters burned the copies of the Act. Political parties including the Indian National
Congress (INC) and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) called the move politically motivated in
the context of the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. The West Bengal Chief Minister, Mamata
Banerjee, called the implementation of CAA a “game of taking away people’s rights. She added that
it's another game to divide Bengal.”8 INC’s President Malikarjun Kharge said that it is a “desperate
attempt at divisive politics”. Moreover, All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief,
Asaduddin Owaisi, and National Congress Party’s Sharad Pawar expressed strong disapproval of the
Act. Shashi Tharoor, a Congress MP, and a renowned scholar even said that if Indian National
Development Inclusive Alliance (INDIA) - a political alliance of 26 opposition parties - comes into
power, it will repeal the Act.9
The implementation of the CAA has also been met with international condemnation. The U.S.
Department of State spokesperson said that Washington is “closely monitoring how this Act will be
implemented. Respect for religious freedom and equal treatment under the law for all communities
are fundamental democratic principles.” A spokesperson for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) said, “As we said in 2019, we are concerned that India’s
Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 (CAA) is fundamentally discriminatory in nature and breach
of India's international human rights obligations."10
Indian officials have responded harshly to the U.S. concerns. India’s External Affairs Minister, S.
Jaishankar said, “ I am not questioning the imperfections or otherwise of their democracy or their
principles or lack of it. I am questioning their understanding of our history. If you hear comments
from many parts of the world, it is as if the Partition of India never happened, there were no 
consequential problems which the CAA is supposed to address."11 Hitherto, the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) had been recommending to the State Department to
designate India as a ‘country of particular concern’ for its ill treatement of minorities. Moreover,
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have called the Act discriminating against Muslims
and have asked to repeal it.12
In her book, “Shades of Saffron: From Vajpayee to Modi,” Indian author Saba Naqvi stresses that
when in the 2004 elections Vajpayee adopted a moderate approach towards Muslims, Narendra
Modi, Chief Minister of Gujarat at the time was not comfortable with that policy. He (CM Modi) said
that “wooing Muslims was a fruitless exercise as they would never support the BJP.”13 Even before
Modi’s statement, the majority of BJP’s political elite believed in the same narrative against
Muslims. The CAA would further marginalise Muslims to mere second-class citizens in India.
Politically, the implications of implementing the CAA are still to be seen in post-Lok Sabha elections.
However, still if the Indian Supreme Court wants, it can halt either the implementation of the rules,
or any actions taken under the rules until the case is heard and decided.
