THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
The Citizenship Act, 1955 was enacted to provide for the acquisition and
determination of Indian citizenship. On 7th September 2015 and 18th July 2016, the
Government of India had issued two notifications for amending the Passport (entry
into India) Rules, 1950 and the Foreigners Order 1948. Now, the Government of
India proposes to introduce the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 to further
amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019
provides that certain groups of illegal migrants as per provisions of the Citizenship
Act, 1955 can now become eligible for applying for Indian Citizenship. It also
proposes to reduce the required period of their residence in India for
naturalisation under the Principal Act. Detailed Objects and Reasons of the
Bill are at Annexure.
The Salient features of the Amendment Bill, 2019, inter-alia, are as follows:
i. The Bill inter-alia seeks to amend Section 2, Section 7 (d), Section 18 and
the Third Schedule of the Citizenship Act, 1955. The Bill also makes
provision for insertion of Section 6B in the Principal Act.
ii. The proposed amendment in Section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 provides
that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into
India on or before the 31st day of December, 2014 and who has been
exempted by the Central Government by or under clause (c) of sub-section
(2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 or from the
application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any rule or order
made thereunder, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of
this Act.
-2-
iii. The proposed insertion of Section 6B provides for grant a certificate of
registration or certificate of naturalization to those covered under the
amendment of Section 2. It also provides that from the date of
commencement of the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019, any proceeding
pending against a person covered under this section in respect of illegal
migration or citizenship shall stand abated on conferment of citizenship to
him.
iv. Provisions of the proposed Section 6B of the Bill shall not apply to tribal
areas of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura as included in the Sixth
Schedule of the Constitution and the area covered under "The Inner Line"
notified under the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873.
v. In the Third Schedule to the Principal Act, the proviso in Clause(d) is
proposed to be inserted to the effect that for the person belonging to Hindu,
Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian community in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh or Pakistan, the aggregate period of residence or service of
Government in India as required under this clause shall be read as "not less
than five years" in place of "not less than eleven years”.
vi. Section 7D of the Citizenship Act, 1955 provides for the cancellation of
registration as overseas citizen of India. The new Clause (da) proposed to be
inserted after Clause (d) of Section 7D of the Principal Act adds one more
category falling within the ambit of cancellation. Now, it proposes to include
those Overseas Citizens of India Cardholder who have violated any of the
provisions of this Act or provisions of any other law for time being in force
as may be specified by the Central Government in the notification published
in the Official Gazette
Highlights of the Bill
The Amendment Bill seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. A comparative
table of the provisions of the Principal Act and the Amendment Bill, 2019 is given
below:
Provisions of the Principal Act (57 of 1955) The Amendments proposed
Section 2 (sub section 1) Clause 'b' deals with
defining illegal migrants who are prohibited
from acquiring Indian Citizenship.
As per the proposed amendments, a new
provision is to be inserted after clause 'b'
providing that:
Persons belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist,
Jain, Parsi or Christian community from
Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who
entered into India on or before 31.12.2014
and who has been exempted by the
Government of India from the application of
the provisions of the Passport (Entry into
India) Act, 1920 or the Foreigners Act, 1946
or any other order made there under shall not
be treated as illegal migrants for the purpose
of this Act.
Section 6 B - (to be added) As per the proposed amendments, a new
provision is to be inserted after Section '6A'
providing that the provisions of the new
Section 6B shall not be applicable to Tribal
Areas of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram or
Tripura as included in the Sixth Schedule to
the Constitution and the area covered under
"The Inner line" notified under The Bengal
Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873.
Section 7D of the Principal Act deals with the
cancellation of registration granted to the
Overseas Citizens of India.
The amendment seeks to empower the
Government of India to cancel the
registration as overseas citizen of India in
case of violation of the provisions of this Act
or any other law for the time being in force
after giving adequate opportunity of being
heard.
Third schedule of the Principal Act deals with
qualifications for naturalisation of a person as
Citizen of India.
The Amendment Bill seeks to amend clause
'd' of the Third schedule to reduce period of
residence or service of Government in India
from 'not less than 11 years' to not less than
'five years' for persons mentioned in the
Clause.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
“The Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) was enacted to provide for the
acquisition and determination of Indian citizenship.
2. It is a historical fact that trans-border migration of population has been
happening continuously between the territories of India and the areas presently
comprised in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. Millions of citizens of
undivided India belonging to various faiths were staying in the said areas of
Pakistan and Bangladesh when India was partitioned in 1947. The constitutions of
Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh provide for a specific state religion. As a
result, many persons belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian
communities have faced persecution on grounds of religion in those countries.
Some of them also have fears about such persecution in their day-to-day life where
right to practice, profess and propagate their religion has been obstructed and
restricted. Many such persons have fled to India to seek shelter and continued to
stay in India even if their travel documents have expired or they have incomplete
or no documents.
3. Under the existing provisions of the Act, migrants from Hindu, Sikh,
Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian communities from Afghanistan, Pakistan or
Bangladesh who entered into India without valid travel documents or if the
validity of their documents has expired are regarded as illegal migrants and
ineligible to apply for Indian citizenship under section 5 or section 6 of the Act.
4. The Central Government exempted the said migrants from the adverse
penal consequences of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the Foreigners
Act, 1946 and rules or orders made thereunder vide notifications, dated 07.09.2015
and dated 18.07.2016. Subsequently, the Central Government also made them
eligible for long term visa to stay in India, vide, orders dated 08.01.2016 and
14.09.2016. Now, it is proposed to make the said migrants eligible for Indian
Citizenship.
5. The illegal migrants who have entered into India up to the cut of date of
31.12.2014 need a special regime to govern their citizenship matters. For this
purpose the Central Government or an authority specified by it, shall grant the
certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation subject to such conditions,
restrictions and manner as may be prescribed. Since many of them have entered
into India long back, they may be given the citizenship of India from the date of
their entry in India if they fulfil conditions for Indian citizenship specified in
section 5 or the qualifications for the naturalisation under the provisions of the
Third Schedule to the Act.
6. The Bill further seeks to grant immunity to the migrant of the aforesaid
Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities so that any
proceedings against them regarding in respect of their status of migration or
citizenship does not bar them from applying for Indian citizenship. The competent
authority, to be prescribed under the Act, shall not take into account any
proceedings initiated against such persons regarding their status as illegal migrant
or their citizenship matter while considering their application under section 5 or
section 6 of the Act, if they fulfil all the conditions for grant of citizenship.
7. Many persons of Indian origin including persons belonging to the said
minority communities from the aforesaid countries have been applying for
citizenship under section 5 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 but they are unable to
produce proof of their Indian origin. Hence, they are forced to apply for
citizenship by naturalisation under section 6 of the said Act, which, inter alia,
prescribe twelve years residency as a qualification for naturalisation in terms of the
Third Schedule to the Act. This denies them many opportunities and advantages
that may accrue only to the citizens of India, even though they are likely to stay in
India permanently. Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Third Schedule to the
Act to make applicants belonging to the said communities from the aforesaid
countries eligible for citizenship by naturalisation if they can establish their
residency in India for five years instead of the existing eleven years.
8. Presently, there is no specific provision in section 7D of the Act to cancel
the registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder who violates any
provisions of the Act or any other law for the time being in force. It is also
proposed to amend the said section 7D so as to empower the Central Government
to cancel registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder in case of violation
of any provisions of the Act or any other law for the time being in force.
9. Since there is no specific provision in the Act at present to provide an
opportunity of being heard to the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder before
cancellation of the Overseas Citizen of India Card under section 7D, it is proposed
to provide the opportunity of being heard to the Overseas Citizen of India
Cardholder before the cancellation of the Overseas Citizen of India Card.
10. The Bill further seeks to protect the constitutional guarantee given to
indigenous populations of North Eastern States covered under the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution and the statutory protection given to areas covered under "The
Inner Line" system of the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873.
11. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH